---
---

{% include intro.md %}

## Audience

Every lesson should be written with specific learners in mind.  These
<span i="learner persona">[personas][t3-personas]</span> are ours:

-   Yanina is in the third year of a computer science degree. She worked on
    several volunteer projects in high school and through her mosque, but the
    "Introduction to Software Engineering" course she's about to take will be
    her first semester-long team project at university. This guide will help her
    and her teammates figure out what to do when.

-   Brad is in Yanina's classes. He started programming when he was nine years
    old, and as a result can do many practical assignments in half the time it
    takes other students (something he attributes to intelligence and aptitude
    rather than to his parents being able to afford to send him to after-school
    coding camps). He finds any discussion of what he privately called "social
    justice bullshit" tiresome; this guide will help him understand why that
    attitude is self-defeating.

-   Ahmadou worked as an illustrator for several years before doing an intensive
    14-week conversion course to become a JavaScript developer. He has a lot of
    experience working in teams to meet deadlines, but is still often bewildered
    by the tools, jargon, and culture of programming. This guide will help him
    figure out what his new colleagues think is "normal".

-   Sharla teaches JavaScript at Yanina's college and for the conversion course
    that Ahmadou went through. They taught the "Introduction to Software
    Engineering" class last semester, and felt that they and their students
    wasted a lot of time on things that turned out not to be useful. This guide
    will help them give more structure to the next offering and set more
    realistic expectations.

Like these personas, readers should:

-   Be able to write multi-page programs in Java, Python, JavaScript, or some
    other modern programming language.

-   Be able to create static web sites using HTML and CSS.

-   Know how to create directories, delete files, and find things with the Unix
    shell.

-   Have used [Git][git] on individual projects.

This book can be read on its own or as a companion to *[Software Tools in
JavaScript][stjs]*, which teaches the basics of software design by showing you
how to build the tools you program with.  If you are looking for a project to do
in a course, adding a tool to those covered there would be fun as well as
educational.

## Topics

Life is short and your project is even shorter, so this book focuses on the
handful of tools and techniques that will help you the most in the short and
medium term:

-   How to work effectively in a small team when you are constantly being
    interrupted by other tasks like the homework for your other courses.

-   What tools you should use to build, test, deploy, and describe software
    in less time and with less pain.

-   How to design a program (or a set of related programs) that will take
    several weeks to write.

-   How a few simple changes in your study habits will enable you to learn more
    and more quickly.

-   What legal rights you have to the software you create as a student (and on
    the job).

-   What we actually know about software development and why we believe it's
    true.

-   What to do when things go wrong.

We have included other material as well, since there is a lot of variation
between project courses (and even more between the people doing them).
Throughout, we are guided by a modified version of [Dobzhansky's
Rule][dobzhansky]:

<blockquote markdown="1">

Nothing in software engineering makes sense except in the light of psychology.

</blockquote>

{: .continue}
Many of the hard problems in software engineering stem from the fact that human
beings think and feel, and we do those things in certain ways.  Our mental
capacity is limited, which means we have to design programs so that they will
fit into the space between our ears. We learn and work better when we are doing
things that help us meet our personal goals, which means projects will be more
successful if we take motivation into account. And as we learn more, the best
way for us to learn changes in predictable ways, so how we are taught should
change too.

## Using and Contributing

{% include contributing.md %}

## Acknowledgments

This book is dedicated to <span i="Petre, Marian">[Marian
Petre][petre-marian]</span>, who taught me how to think about how programmers
think and work.  I am also grateful to all of the students who did projects with
me at the <span i="University of Toronto">University of Toronto</span> and
through <span i="Google Summer of Code">Google Summer of Code</span>, and to
everyone who took part in <span i="UCOSP">UCOSP</span>
<cite>Holmes2014,Holmes2018</cite>.

I have tried to base recommendations on empirical software engineering research
(<span x="research"/>) and on the science of teaching and learning (<span
x="thinking"/>). Where those don't have answers, I have drawn on the experience
of the students and programmers mentioned below.  Any errors, omissions, or
misunderstandings that remain are entirely our fault.

<div class="latex" command="\vspace{\baselineskip}"/>

{% include thanks.html table=true %}

Portions of this book are adapted from material that originally appeared in
<cite>Sholler2019,Wilson2019,Irving2021,Smalls2021</cite>; I'm grateful to <span
i="Taylor & Francis">[Taylor & Francis][taylor-francis]</span>, <span
i="PLOS">[PLOS][plos]</span>, and my co-authors for making available under open
licenses.  I would also like to thank <span i="Graf, David">David Graf</span>
for <span i="doi2bib">[doi2bib][doi2bib]</span> and <span i="Elbakyan,
Alexander">Alexandra Elbakyan</span> for <span
i="Sci-Hub">[Sci-Hub][sci-hub]</span>; this book would have been much harder to
write without their idealism and hard work.
